10 Challenges in Implementing Microservices

Microservices Challenges in implementing we always talk about benefits of adopting Micro services but grass is not always green what about ? Benefits are all well documented , but challenges Here that to tackle are some challenges we need Managing Micro services increase , As number of mines services managing them becomes a challenge a new microservice should be well planned Things can go out of hand very quickly Battle tested tools Instead of building tooling from scratch . Use existing . Monitoring and logging > in microservices architecture Having blindspot a < could be catastrophic > . 1 . Every component /service / server should be monitored 2- Debugging a root cause , spanning services , should be easy f. becomes super critical Distributed tracing kin eg : Zip

Service Discovery ?? With there being 100s of microservices spread across 1000s of servers , how ceeould whom to talk to get it done ? we find Service be through discovery could done 1. central Service registry All of these approaches in turn have LB based 2. discovery their own advantages / disadvantages 3 . Service mesh Authentication and Authorization we cannot keep services open . even internally . 1. ☆ so , along with auth for external services Aum needs to be setup for inter-service communication JWT tokens - a central auth ( internat ) service issuing Configuration Management " " has its own set of secrets & Each service configurations There needs to be way to store . a and access configurations centrally . it their everyone doing of on own is waste time

There's back no going It is very difficult to switch back to ^ Monolith from microservices × % 1. Tech Diversity 2. Teams have tested autonomihg 3 . People have adopted new tools and processes Fault Tolerance There to are more ways fail - Outages are inevitable , but it is important that outage in one service is not bringing down all of them . Hence try to model services around loose > 0 0 coupling - Use brokers " - Asynchronous Dependency wherever possible Internal and External Testing Testing becomes complex with micro services It is hard to get 100% isolated environments + Hard to simulated Distributed Failures

with Failure in mind Design counter-intuitive approach to development But very critical in building robust services MMMMM Assume the code breaks after every single line ↳ solve and reiterate Dependency management is a nightmare Managing dependency across services is tough . There are 3 kinds of dependencies to think about I. service dependency > Sync dependency may trigger cascading failures 2. library / Module dependency ? Without proper versioning or backward compatibility , dolling out changes becomes painfully slow 3. Data dependency services relying on data coming from other service will hamper the end user experience -