The Choke Algorithm

The Choke Algorithm BitTorrent works on a P2P network , hence there is no central resource allocation Unit . How would the peers ensure 1: maximum download speed 2. prevent anyone from abusing the network * peer would naturally try to download from whoever it can The choke algorithm was introduced to guarantee a reasonable upload and download reciprocation . " The choke algorithm " is a variant of tit-for-tat algorithm Free rider problem Free - riders are peers that never > _ Uploads but downloads , always , 7 r should be penalized Hence our criteria to choose a peer to " " send our content to cannot be simple it should be based on reciprocation .

and Interested Choking MMMM choking is a temporary refusal to upload A B We that peer A has choked peeps because say CHOKED peer B is unable to download file from A , but peer A can download from peer B Choking is necessary because TCP congestion when send connections at 1. we across many once . 2. prevent network abuse and starvation choking rather it periodic and Unhooking aren't perpetual is . the upload happens only until a peer is un choked . Interested peer is someone who wants a piece that you have INTERESTED A- wants a piece pts that is , A B there with B. hence we wants P1 that PL say A is INTERESTED in peer B.

" " How to find peers to un choke ? A n we are prioritizing to unchoke peers who UN CHOKE let us download the pieces recently B * Reciprocity - returning a favour Example : A is choked by B i. e. it cannot get any piece from B . B wanted piece that A had and since A that a gave piece B unchokes A allowing it to now download from B . There be thousands nodes in the swarm but few of a * may of them are randomly picked by tracker as a peer for each . to choke and choke ? But , how would we find peers an Download rate Reciprocity 66 " Any peer will upload to peers , who give the best download rate this to let others download encourages peers prohibits free riders that never uploads

Choke algorithm for leeches when in leeches state , the choke algorithm is called 10 seconds every leaves everytime a peer a peerset choked peer becomes interested or not everytime . an un 10 seconds A orders the 1 . Every . peer by their download _ interested remote peers rate to A and the unhooked fastest 3 are . Regular Un choke 2. For regular unchoke , the peers are ordered ^ by their download rate to local peer and - ; who have sent at least one block in last ^^ 30sec . This guarantees only active peers are un choked .

3 . Every 30 seconds , one additional interested peer is unchoked at random To promote [ no need of reciprocation ] fairness to new peers Optimistic Un choke Advantages of optimistic Un choke Bootstrap evaluates download capacity of new peers n n bootstrap new peers who do not have OU by giving them the any piece to share , first piece . 4 . if the optimistic Unchoked peer is from the 3 fastest peer , another peer is chosen for an un choke it peer was also interested , the round completes interested still it is an choked and if peer is not , we continue to unchoke other peers optimistically * we would have more than 4 un chokes but at Max 4 interested unchokes

" boosts behaviour " Choking algorithm a good 1 if upload rate of A is high , > it A more peers will Un choke , giving > a faster download Free Riders are penalized Free riders never upload , they only download 0 Hence when other peer is choosing whom to A Unchoke the be last , free rider will in the 5 > ^ y list of sorting because criteria download rate to A Ordered by The Optimistic Unchoke only hope for a free rider is Anti - snubbing There is a possibility that a peer is CHOKED by all others How it ? would proceed peer who has not sent last 60sec anything in Optimistic unchoke infrequent it retaliates and to to the refuses upload peer which increases optimistic unchokes in the network

Choke algorithm for seeder leaves peerset every 10 seconds or everytime a peer a choked peer becomes interested / not interested everytime an un The algorithm the peers 1 . orders according to the time they were last unhooked r . that have pending request for blocks Or . Higher upload rate is given a priority Penalizes free riders with high bandwidth 2. The other peers ( never unchoked ) are ordered by upload rates 3- For first 20 seconds unchoke first 3 peers seed kept un choked and unchokes one at random seed random Unchoked peer For the next 10 seconds un chokes the first 4 peers seed kept un choked seeder is not uncho king based on upload rate instead it time they last an choked is using were peers in active peer set are changed regularly too ordered peer random peer taking a slot from