What is Rolling Deployment?

Rolling Deployment Rolling deployment is a deployment strategy v2 v2 v2 that slowly replaces previous version of the v2 v1 v1 the application with new one v1 v1 v1 by replacing the underlying infrastructure For example , in 1<85 containers running the service are replaced one by one, or F- C2 machines running the service are replaced one by one The infra replacement happens while the incoming requests * are served Incremental , and not instant The Rolling Deployment is incremental , hence during the L B time there of deployment , Cleo uld be some servers serving servers the new version while others old serving . Hence , depending on which server the request goes to the response of the version would be generated corresponding

How to implement Rolling Deployment Rolling deployment is always done gracefully Pick 1. a server for deployment L B 2. Stop the incoming traffic to it the load balancer - remove it from servers 3. Wait for existing requests to be completed 4. if no intra replacement @ - pull the latest code / artifact × Restart - restart the processes 5 . if infra replacement - terminate the server - create the new server with the new code 6. attach the server to the load balancer

Tuning rolling deployment I. Concurrent Servers Instead of picking L server for update ' ' at a time , we can pick n concurrently - faster deployments ' n' should not be too small or too large 2. Double - Half Deployment A to implement common way rolling deployment is to double the code and infra with new bring it back to original capacity 4 8 4 * Ensure that DB your . Cache are able to handle number of connections large 3. Terminate one and spin one with new code

Pros of adopting Rolling Deployment - - Much faster than Blue Green deployment incurs downtime Deployment zero - Rollouts are gradual - Any defects affect only a fraction of requests - - cost efficient deployment strategy Rollbacks simple - are cons of adopting Rolling Deployment - No environment isolation b/w the old and the new - Changes wee rollout has to be backward compatible - Changes wee rollout has to be forward compatible takes long time to complete - Deployment a - stateful applications will be affected during deployment