say, username makes an API call to the backend and there was some issue with the network because of which the call failed.
the second, we can pass the observed error to the user and then let user decide if he or she try or do whatever with it.
typically you would think that hey, automatic retries gives the best user experience, so let's just do that.
but depending on where the failure happened, it would determine if we could retry or not.
so let's say we look at the failure timeline on where possibly the failure could have happened.
first, let's say user a makes an API call, but before this call even hit the server, the, the network got interrupted, which means the request did not even hit the server.
if, in case, you know this, you can automatically retry.
it's basically safe to retry it, given that you know that the request didn't even hit the server.
second situation is when the request hit the server, the server started processing it, but before the process could even complete, the network got terminated or basically there was a network hiccup.
in this case you are not sure if you should retry or not, because you don't know what's server or at which stage of the server, like while servers was processing.
now, if you retry, you don't know what kind of implications would it have, right?
third case, which is where the request went to the server, server did its entire computation, entire processing, and while it was about to send the response, before the response could hit the client, the response or the or the network became unreliable or the network crashed.
in this case, again, your client doesn't know that the processing was done, although your server did the processing.
now, in this case, again, you are not sure if you should retry or not, right?
so if I take an example like: what could happen, why?
what could happen if we just do a normal retry right now, if we just by default, always do an automatic retry, there is a chance where some critical endpoints might lead to an unintended Behavior.
firstly, for example, let's say with payment service, where you have an API that transfers money from a to B's account- right.
and in that case, let's say you have a URL called slash payment, slash B, which any authenticated user would hit and in the payload may pass in the amount, right.
so let's say you would want to transfer ten thousand dollars to user B.
now, in this case, if we just automatically retry every time we see a failure, what could happen is if, let's say, we retry n times due to failure that has happened, it is very much possible that we might be deducting n into ten thousand dollars from a and moving it to B.
it's totally unintended, right.
so in this case we cannot just blindly retry until we know, or unless we know, the that server has definitely not processed it.
now here, how do we, how do we build a system that is robust enough to handle such situations, that either it gives us freedom to do automatic retries or it dictates when to retry and when to not retract.
so in either case, the answer to this is we need a way to be item potent, which means no matter how many times the operation or the request goes, the server will Pro, will process the request exactly once.
so the idea here is: the apis that we build needs to be item potent, which means that when the server sees the API for the first line, it processes it.
if it sees called multiple times, it either ignores or throws error.
but what we are exactly trying to do over here is we are trying to build an exactly one's semantic that if a request is made, it will be processed exactly once, not twice, not Thrice, not zero times, but exactly once.
now gives us a problem, right?
hey, at least we have now converts to a part where we understand the problem really well, and now we would want to define a solution for this in order to now here we can very clearly see that when we are getting so many requests, we need to know that, because we would want to process the request exactly once, no matter how many times it comes.
we need a way to understand or to keep track, or that, hey, have we seen this request before?
so you may be tempted to just do a copy paste of URL, or rather, keep track of all the requests that you have seen and then you see if, if you have processed it before or not.
if you just do, if you just keep track of URLs, if you just keep track of URLs, then and if the payload is different, then you don't know, like, what to do or what not to do, because you may think that you have already handled it, but you would have not because payload would be different.
so then you would, you might be tempted to keep track of the URL and the payload, maybe some parameters you are passing in in HTTP header.
you may be tempted to let me do hash of it and move forward.
so, instead of making it highly complicated, we keep it really simple, right, and how we go about that is using something called as item potency Keys.
let's just keep it simple and let's just create something called as item potency Keys.
now, item potency Keys is something that would help us or help server disambiguate the request.
first, your client, before making the actual API call, First talks to the server to generate a random ID.
this random ID will be the item potent key that it would need to pass in future request.
now, this key might- or it totally depends on the implementation- but against this random ID, your server might store what purpose or what API did the user want to, or what operation did the user want to take.
for example, money transfer would be one of the operations.
you might have other operations for which you are generating the item potent keys.
now, this key and the purpose that you- and this is something that your server- would store in the backend so that the next time the request comes in, the server keeps or the server can validate if it has handled this request or not.
let's say your client wanted to transfer money from A to B account.
so first step we did is it talk to the server to generate a random ID.
right, your server took the operation or generated ID store, the operation against which this user created something like that meta information.
second you, your client then then invokes the actual Epi to do the actual money transfer, but while doing that it passes the random ID that was generated, which is the item potent key.
the server then checks the ID that it got in the request and when it validates that if it has already handled it or not, if it has already handled it, then it ignores or throws the error, depending on the implementation.
if not, then it handles it and then it updates that, hey, I've already handled this particular key.
now, this is where your server is keeping track of a state that if it has already handled this request or not, so then it's responsibility of the server that once it handles it, it either deletes it or marks it as done.
right now it is possible that while this request is being sent or being partially handled, your client sees an error.
your client sees an error because of network glitch that happened.
now your client would, by default, retry the request.
it would retry the request with the same, because now it only has this one one either potent key and because there was a network glitch, your client- your client- retries the same API with the same idea potent key if it generates another idle potent key, which means it is a new request.
so when you are retrying, you would be retrying the same API again, which means you'll be passing the same item potent key to the backend.
now, when server gets this request, it checks that hey, have I already handled this other potent key or not?
if it has already handled, it would throw the error, ignore the request and tell Clan to not retry.
so instead of doing an implicit thing on URLs and headers and payloads or hash and compute and whatnot, you keep it really simple and ask your client to tell, to ask server for an idea, and server keeps track of it.
now here, this is exactly what almost all payment service out there does.
you go through Stripes API documentation.
you are required to pass an item potency key header while making the API request of transfer, and this is exactly what are.
this is exactly how most of the payment services are built.
they handle item potency this exact same way and this is exactly how you are that.
you could pass item potency key.
you can also pass in with query parameters and whatnot, but stripe asks you to pass a request header called adopt and Z key in which is: add: a potency key is faster, right, okay.
so a basic flow of Architecture is where, instead of just having a user in API server and your payments DB, you would have an auxiliary database, a simple key value store with some TTL, in which the idea is that whenever your client would want to make a critical API call, it would first generate an either potency key from the server, the server would generate one.
keep track of it in a key value store with some TTL stored.
let's say, red is- you may pick any, by the way, it really does not matter.
so the server keeps track of all of these item potency key in this database that you have.
it's a simple key Value Store.
when the operation is successful, the server actually deletes it from the system.
this way, what you get is: the server will always ensure that, no matter what the pro, the request is processed.
exactly once, right, no matter how many times your client retries, the server would do would process this request exactly once.
so what we just pulled is we built an exactly one semantics for our API, and this is not just limited to payment.
you can apply to any critical API that needs to be executed exactly once, no matter what, and you can add meta information to handle other cases if you want, or just handle the validation of user and operation and whatnot.
but the idea is to have a separate database or a separate table to just keep track of all the item potency keys that the server has ever generated for a user for a particular operation.
right, and this is how most payments services, or most payments apis, are built, by considering item potency.
right, and all of this is taken from Stripes engineering block, which I've Linked In the description down below.
I would highly recommend you to check out the stripes API documentation to understand what all apis require you to pass- item potency keys and what all apis are: just normal, normal plane, simple API that basically does not require you to pass such keys right.
you can very clearly see the difference of which apis are critical, which apis are not right.
uh, I hope you found it interesting.
I hope you found it amusing.