Stealing from BitTorrent

Exploiting and stealing from a BitTorrent Network All p2p networks Free Riders suffer from but downloading , never uploading other genuine 1. affect users threaten the existence the system 2. of Things would have been easy . if we had central keep would a authority to a check on the abuse . Quick Overview A BitTorrent network has < _ - seeders : nodes having complete file , teachers : nodes currently downloading the file - leeches talk to seeders and other leeches for , the missing pieces to download faster . ' written about Although . there are guidelines peers but the can behave however it want . peer

Pretend to be a new peer You choose not to may announce any pieces to the tracker and pretend to be new in > " < the network . This tracker would mention this node to way , never any peers hence , no one would request any piece from you . to the tracker When a peer starts , it announces itself and the tracker sends it list it a of peers can potentially talk to . We can aggressively announce ourself to the tracker and accumulating a large number { } 1 than of peers addresses more what is prescribed ) Tracker responds with 50 at a time but we , can request 200 Imax ] and making repeated calls could help us build a large collection . with selection Be greedy piece Peers are supposed to follow rarest first policy - so as to ensure min dependence on seeders but what don't we would grab whichever if we . piece we could and complete our download faster .

Open large number of connections A peer will allow you to download Reciprocation is the key only if you reciprocate and provide to ensure , no free loading a good upload . Unc hoke in it But , once a while it does an optimistic which node to download without reciprocation randomly allows one . lot By connecting to a of peers , it increases its chances of getting optimistically anchored and continue to download Download speed # peers cue connect to speed a that other peers do not know given the number of connections you opened . would continue to share pegs they usually pieces. * Opening multiple connections with the same peer does not help . it may kick you out * latest version of choke algorithm fixes this

Pretend to upload peers will allow you to download . them great upload s r When you give a what to ? so , if we pretend upload send data to tracker 1. dummy peers are encouraged to send upload / download stats to tracker . To exploit . We can send bloated numbers since tracker wouldn't verify it would think , you are much and hence give you boost by sharing uploading a you as a peer during announcement . 2. upload dummy data but while we can also falsely announce our pieces uploading , we send dummy data . fail but although MD 's verification could we would still get a boost .