EIG Algorithm for Byzantine Agreement

Exponential Information Gathering for Byzantine Agreement Reaching is extremely important consensus in " " distributed network any . eg : we cannot have two data nodes in a cluster such that one thinks price = $1000 while the other thinks price = $2000 the Depending on which node the request hits , user would see the value inconsistent view corresponding , giving an somehow the nodes need to value agree on one . . ^ ! Byzantine Agreement . um Byzantine agreement is a problem of when reaching a consensus even one or many nodes / processes are malicious / corrupt Exponential Information Gathering Core Idea : Relay the values across rounds , record the communication path , and decide .

Elk Data Structure Ela data structure tree that grows is a exponentially . The paths root the tree represent from the of 2 3 the communication path from which the . . . . . . . ' ' : : : ( , : received propagated ) message is : < I _ _ , - . I - - 12 ; 1h 31 : N n :p I :3 32 3 The tree constructed level : . is level by : : : : : 327 and is designed to hold all possible permutations 3271 of length K . ( distinct paths ) 32714 At each level K node has , every n - k children to maintain uniqueness of the path " " Root node is labelled as 13.2.7.1 ] if message labelled 4 a node received a . it holds the message in the tree along that path level 3- deep EIQ Hence the data structure is like a trie constructed over 3 nodes A. B and C A B L C AB 17C BA BC CA CB ABC ACB BAC BCA CAB CBA

The algorithm * construction of Elk Tree is covered in previous topics EIG Tree we assume is independently constructed at each node The algorithm is tolerant to f faulty processes so long as n > 3f i. e number nodes much larger than the faults of are " " when ( junk / a process sends ill formed garbage ) value to other - nodes be participating in the consensus , the consensus should not prone to that . The flow The processes propagates values for ft L rounds and each node / process builds its own Ela Tree Every node constructs its A B e own F- IG of depth ; f -11 levels - AB 17C BA BC CA CB : It holds values it receives from other nodes through " the specific ABC ACB BAC BCA CAB CBA Comm paths

if a node receives garbage value , the node ignores it be int but eg : value should . string received received value should be in range [0-100] , but 5000 Once the Elk is constructed , to make the decision , a node traverses the tree bottom up - The value from the leaves , is propagated up . For non leaf node - , n A B C value = majority of values its children of AB 17C BA BC CA CB if majority , Vn= Maj to ) else , on = V0 ABC ACB BAC BCA CAB CBA the value default The final consensus value will be value converged at root . 1 . if no faulty nodes . No corrupt nodes , cell nodes would to the same converge Vu=v 2. few corrupt nodes , sending corrupt values will be absorbed and not propagated up .