TimeSlice Algorithm for Leader Election

Times lice algorithm for leader Election leader Election is automated an way of system Recovery . When the leader node is down the leader Election , algorithm is triggered which elects the new leader thus restoring the system The Time Slice Algorithm and synchronous It is an unbounded , impractical , yet interesting a leader election algorithm . It assumes that each > r node in the network is - placed unidirectional - on a ring < positive integer - has been assigned a as ID knows its neighbour in clockwise direction - about the total nodes n in the network - aware The algorithm is slow and it elects the very the minimum the leader node with UID as new . The number messages passed Oln ) and time of are to elect new leader is 0 (n Umin )

The algorithm 3 Election happens in phases 1,23 . . _ _ . ^ > Each phase consist rounds of R 5 r 11 } Phase 1 , round 1 " < Phase 1 round 2 18 , q around 3 noiounds v phase 1 , 13 i. Phase 1 round . n In phase i , the nodes forward phase 2 round 1 I . the message / token with UID i. Until then is silent , everyone say have , in topology we nodes with IDs 3.9.5 , 11 , 13,18 In phase L . because no node has Uid 1 for all n=6 rounds nothing happens In phase 2 . because no node has Uid 2 for all n=6 rounds nothing happens Hence , the first 12 rounds happened with no messages exchanged or leader elected we enter phase 3. ^ .

Now that we are in phase 3 , the node with UID 3 will react since ( 2n ) rounds no messages were sent in first 2 6=12 . Node with UID 3 realizes it is the new leader Hence it creates an announcement message and sends it to its neighbour 3 3 For next I round the 3 phase ^ n of - > 5 11 the be the will passed along message on ring and will know everyone < t 18 4 3 is the new leader . v 13 Once is the election process stops everyone aware . complexity analysis as we send message only after , the leader is elected Number exchanged ocn , of messages = But Oln Umin ) , the time complexity is not given that messages are even sent until start the i we phase = 6min , we are just is unbounded waiting . Hence the time complexity on the minimum UID value in the network .