Natural Language Search at Zomato

Natural Search at Zomato language Comato is a restaurant aggregator that allows - restaurants to list themselves people to order from their favourite restaurant - One of the main medium to discover food/restaurant is search! On zomato people search for 3 things 1. Dish > pizza, burger 2. Restaurant - Dominos, Pizza Hut Pizza Dominos" 3. Cuisine > Chinese I combine the above entities. People also fire complex search queries that Simple Search Tokenize. Match, Rank Engines: Typical configuration: Title match >>> Description Consider the "Best costee mean me" query: This will bring up restaurants having "Best" in their name - Best Coffee Cafe Hence, we cannot do lexical - Best Bliss need match, instead we - Bar Best "Natural language Understanding"

Plus because of voice search the queries are more verbose cheese - Garlic Bread with Dip - veg restaurant in Karamangala Chai and Samosa - single-intent queries are easy to answer, but such queries require deeper understanding of domain a natural language. Intent Understanding given a query, understand what user is seeking Intent: Nearest Outlet Dominos outlets near me we mo Restaurant Location Entity: Dominos Lomato classifies search queries in 3 categories 1. Dish + Bisk: Chai and samosa Best Dominos Pizza near one 2. Restaurant + Disk: mcd burger a 3. Restaurant/Dish + near me, best, inelevant text: pizza near me It becomes to understand the really easy query have nanowned the once we scope.

Challenges in query understanding 1. Unavailability of labelled data 2. queries involving more than one language I - Makni Dalke Saath mean Multi-lingual queries -sabse acha pizza 3. Phrases that mean the same burger 3 Mcd (language agnostic - conjunctions - Mcd K burger and fillers 4. Spelling variations Rajma 3 Synonym - rice Rajmachanal and Phonetics - Rumali roti Roomali Roti Model training word2vec 3 Bi-ISTM > CRF BytePain Enc

word(rec -> Neural network model to learn word associations 1. we can provide a corpus and train the model 2. It generates vector for each term in vocabulary These vectors can then be used with other algorithms Zomato trained word ever on their domain data Restaurant paneer: 10.1, 0,..... ] milk: ............ ] Food Menu monderes > ............ ) bugen: Location humbali.............. I Byte-pair encoding for tokenization Instead of tokenizing text generically, BPE is a supervised tokenization. It is a sub-word tokenizer FRIEDRICE- FRIED, RICE H m it extracts token the from within Because these words are prevalent word as well. in the corpus. This helps in extracting the max information out from the text and query.

Bidirectional ISTM+CRF to do sequence taggin vocab to These tokens are used as generate word embeddings and then a Neural Network is trained to understand Named Entities roti Mix veg subji aur -> Mix veg subji aur roti Dist Dish Jack's Aaloo Tikki Burger -> Jack's Aaloo Tikki Burger Restaurant Dist Architecture the intent, Depending on search query to be fixed gets adjusted f O o - Search C S N S Search Engine - Gateway Extracting info Restaurant from query to understand "B Y the intent and Food Menu i Model then fire search Location